Nikto
Nikto is a highly configurable
Open Source web server scanner
that tests for thousands of
dangerous files and programs,
vulnerable server versions,
and various server configuration issues.
It performs well, but is
not designed for stealth
as it will send many requests and
embed information about itself
in the User-Agent header.
Nikto can scan multiple servers and ports
and will scan as many
pages as it can find.
On sites with heavy content,
such as an ecommerce site,
a Nikto scan can take
several hours to complete.
We have two options to
control the scan duration.
The simplest option is to
set the maxtime option,
which will halt the scan after
the specified time limit.
This does not optimize
the scan in any way.
Nikto will simply stop scanning.
Our second option is to tune the scan
with the -T option.
We can use this feature to control
which types of tests we want to run.
There are times when we don’t want
to run all the tests built in to Nikto,
such as when verifying the existence
of a certain class of vulnerability.
Tuning a scan is invaluable
in these situations.
Nikto is especially useful for
catching low-hanging fruit,
reporting non-standard
server headers,
and catching server configuration errors.
To demonstrate this, let’s run Nikto
against www.megacorpone.com.
We’ll specify the host we
want to scan with -host,
and for the sake of this demonstration,
we’ll limit the scan
duration to 30 seconds.
Although we limited the scan duration,
the output still provided
some interesting information.
For example, it identified that the
version of Apache running on the server
is out of date and past its end-of-life.
We have only demonstrated
a fraction of the tools
available in Kali Linux in
this brief introduction,
but the tools we have covered
so far will serve us well
for the demonstrations that
follow in the rest of the module.